# Cryptocurrencies as Cyberstatism

*by [Frank Braun](/), 2020-01-06*

## Prelude

(Note: Most of this prelude has been put on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/thefrankbraun/status/1213190589149265922) before, the impatient reader might want to skip to section [Cyberstatism](#cyberstatism))

I have been wondering for a long time why cryptocurrencies in general and Bitcoin especially became so, for lack of a better word, toxic.

Maybe it's just my personal experience and that experience is totally
subjective, but to me it seems that the level of hostility experienced
(mostly) online in Bitcoin is way stronger than:

1.  It was in the beginning. I have been "around" Bitcoin since the very
    early days and I didn't experience it like that at all during that
    time. It seemed to be more of a collaborative effort driven by the
    excitement of building something new and potentially revolutionary.

2.  The level of hostility which can be witnessed in other tech oriented
    online communities. Nerds are kind of famous for strongly voiced
    opinions, especially regarding their favorite tech, may it be an
    editor, operating system, or programming language.

However, the toxicity level in cryptocurrencies in general and Bitcoin
especially seems to be off the charts compared to other tech projects.
It seems to be have become almost impossible to have rational
discussions about technical details that do not devolve into flame wars.

My first hypothesis for why that is the case was:

_Toxicity is the consensus mechanism in Bitcoin._

The reasoning being that while proof-of-work is a great mechanism to
reach consensus in the distributed ledger for **already agreed** upon
rules, it is terrible to reach consensus for **rule changes**.

If not most of all miners and users agree on a rule change it will lead
to a fork.

Forks lead to a fracturing of the user base **without** solving future
conflicts. The BTC/BCH fork was such a case. The BCH/BSV gives empirical
evidence that a fork doesn't solve that problem permanently.

Forks are economically bad, because they lead to a fracturing of the
user base and developers, bring uncertainty for new and existing users,
etc.

So basically the only good rule change mechanism Bitcoin has is to reach
nearly 100% consensus between miners and users **upfront**, which makes
it extremely hard to make even very desirable upgrades.

This solidifies the Bitcoin protocol and makes it attackable by altcoins
(in terms of additional features).

It has been argued that a solidification of the Bitcoin protocol is not
necessarily a bad thing, especially given the "digital gold" and Bitcoin
as a store-of-value narrative.

So an economically sound consensus mechanism (for rule upgrades /
governance) seems to be toxicity.

Toxicity keeps the community together and bashes all outsiders (for
example, this leads to terms like "Bcash" and "shitcoins").

However, toxicity alienates outsiders and prevents upgrades, making
Bitcoin effectively the orthodoxy of cryptocurrencies.

So either the Bitcoin protocol is good enough as it is to build
innovation on top of it (there will likely not be any major changes to
the protocol) or it will be out-competed in terms of features.

Granted, given Bitcoin's first mover advantage, brand recognition, and
its position as the major cryptocurrency and default trading pair on
most exchanges might give Bitcoin a position which is uncatchable far
into the future.

Newer cryptocurrencies like [Decred](https://decred.org/) put a
consensus mechanism in place which is extremely fork resistant (see
[Detailed analysis of Decred fork
resistance](https://medium.com/decred/detailed-analysis-of-decred-fork-resistance-93022e0bcde7)),
which might be the reason why the discussions over there seem to be much
more civil, they actually can resolve disagreements without a fork.

But it might also be that it's just because their community and position
in the market is much smaller.

## Cyberstatism

The argument above might explain parts of the picture, but further
discussing and thinking about the problem let me come to the following,
for a libertarian rather uncomfortable, conclusion:

_Cryptocurrencies are a form of Cyberstatism._

Let me try to explain what I mean by that phrase.

Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin are a form of [Fiat
money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiat_money) in the sense that they
create money "out of thin air" which doesn't have intrinsic value to
begin with. Granted, most cryptocurrencies do not suffer from the
inflation problem of government fiat money (cryptocurrencies usually
have a fixed monetary supply) and energy has to be expended in order to
"print" them (through mining).

However, cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin lack intrinsic value when they
are started. The famous [Bitcoin pizza
purchase](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Laszlo_Hanyecz) is often viewed as
the point in time where Bitcoin switched from being a curiosity to
becoming useful and valuable as a medium of exchange.

If you look at cryptocurrencies from the lens of fiat money, different
cryptocurrencies competing with each other could be viewed as a zero-sum
game. They are all competing to become "cybermoney" (a term from [The
Sovereign
Individual](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/82256.The_Sovereign_Individual)),
just like states compete over a fixed amount of available _territory_.

If the market for cybermoney is fixed, this is a zero-sum game and
competing cryptocurrencies indeed show signs of competing states.

Politics becomes the main mechanism of resolving conflicts, not
competition of different products on a free market.

Coins forking off become secession movements and are fought strongly as
such (e.g., BTC/BCH and BCH/BSV).

People heavily invested into certain coins (emotionally and/or
financially) start to behave like nationalists, fighting for _their_
coin and _against_ the other coins. Financial investment only makes that
a stronger force, because it makes economic sense (if the coins
"captures" more territory the value of the investment will go up).

Like with states, the biggest player often becomes the biggest bully...

## Conclusion

This is just a theory and I'm sure I will get my fair share of hate for
it. If, however, there is some truth to the argument I'm wondering what
the conclusion is, given that I find it rather worrisome from a
libertarian perspective.

First of all, the competition to become "cybermoney" is **not** a
zero-sum game. The real competitor is government-issued fiat money and
upcoming state- and corporate-issued cryptocurrencies like Facebook's
Libra. That's where the actual war is fought and where it is determined
if the world will see an alternative to fiat and these centrally
controlled coins. Since there is a "war on cash" going on, there seems
to be a limited amount of time left to establish one or more
decentralized cryptocurrencies as a valid alternative **for payments**.

Furthermore, exchangeability between different cryptocurrencies
independent from centralized exchanges is of paramount importance. The
[Decred DEX](https://github.com/decred/dcrdex) and
[Bisq](https://bisq.network) are very important steps in that direction.
What is also needed is a wider availability of over-the-counter
exchanges that allow to trade cash for crypto in person.

If all cryptocurrencies can be easily exchanged for one another in a
decentralized fashion, they can compete with each other more like
different products on a free market and form a "cyberbloc" against the
real enemy. There is no need to look at the competition between
different cryptocurrencies as a zero-sum game.

Given the two, focus on the real competition and better exchangeability
between different cryptocurrencies, it might be possible to make a real
dent into the system of government issued fiat money.
